= Blessed are the poor =
Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship  
February 6, 2010  
Will Fitzgerald  
Matthew 5:1-3; Luke 6:17-20, 24  

Matthew 5:1 When Jesus​a​ saw the crowds, he went up the mountain; and after he sat down, his disciples came to him. 2 Then he began to speak, and taught them, saying: 
3 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 

Luke 6:17 He came down with them and stood on a level place, with a great crowd of his disciples and a great multitude of people from all Judea, Jerusalem, and the coast of Tyre and Sidon. 18 They had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were troubled with unclean spirits were cured. 19 And all in the crowd were trying to touch him, for power came out from him and healed all of them. 
20 Then he looked up at his disciples and said: Blessed are you who are poor, 
for yours is the kingdom of God. 
24 “But woe to you who are rich, 
for you have received your consolation. 

== Introduction to the Sermon on the Mount and Plain ==

I have, for some time, been wanting to do a teaching series on the Sermon on the Mount. It has been the center of Mennonite and Anabaptist belief and action from the first stirrings of the Anabaptist movement in the sixteenth century. More importantly, it is a central library of the teachings of Jesus, and, if you want to be a follower of his, and if we want to be a church of followers of his, we need to come under this set of teachings. 

It may be that we will spend an extended time in the Sermon on the Mount; I'm not quite sure. But I at least hope to come back to the Sermon now and again and examine its themes and ideas, and have its themes and ideas examine us. 

The Sermon on the Mount is found in the gospel of Matthew, starting at chapter five. It's called the "Sermon on the Mount" because Matthew presents Jesus going up into the mountain because so many people were starting to follow him, he had to get to a raised place to teach. It's likely, though, that the sermon is a collection of "sermonettes" or smaller teachings by Jesus. Importantly, the gospel of Luke, starting in 6:17, presents Jesus teaching a very similar sermon; we often called this the "Sermon on the Plain," because he has just come _down_ from the mountain to a level place. Luke's version is shorter and somewhat different. Both start with Jesus announcing some blessings. Today, we'll look at the first blessing in Matthew and Luke, "Blessed are the poor [in spirit] for theirs is the kingdom of God."

== Blessings ==

I was in the coffee shop, and there was this man standing there, waiting for his order. He had his infant son in his arms. The father was in his early thirties, a bit on the bald side, just an ordinary guy, but he was holding his son cradled in one arm so the son was secure and safe. The little boy had a cloth watchcap on. It was close enough to his skin tone that he looked a bit bald, too. He was thoughtfully and carefully munching on his fist, first nibbling on his thumb for a while, then, for a change, on his clasped fingers.

It was all kinds of cute.

I was feeling a bit shy, so I didn't say anything. But I could have said something like, "He sure is cute!" or "What a cutie!" Or, if I wanted to say something about how much I was enjoying seeing this father and son together, I might have said, "You're a lucky man." Or if I wanted to use more religious language, I might have said, "You are so blessed to have such a cute son." If I were in a King James sort of mood, I might have said, "Blessed art thou to have such a child!" However, these days, though we have no problem expressing our joy, this would be a pretty unusual way to say it. 

In Jesus's time, it wasn't at all unsual for people to say things like "Blessed are the poor" or "Blessed are you when...". This was a common way of speaking, no more unsual than saying something like, "You're a lucky man." But it might just be a bit of a stretch for us to enter into such a world. 

Do you remember the time that Jesus was teaching, and a woman shouted out, "Blessed is the womb that bore you and the breasts that nursed you! (Luke 11:27)"? Why did she say such a thing? I think it was out of her delight and appreciation for who Jesus was--something like I was experiencing with the father and infant son in the coffee shop. Whatever the reason, her exclamation expresses her joy: your mother must feel very happy to have such a son. 

I don't know how you feel when someone notices something special about you, like "You look very nice today" or "Good job" or "What a cute son you have." When we are our best selves, I think we take appropriate delight. "Why yes, I guess I do look good today," or "I'm glad the work turned out the way it did," or "I'm glad others are noticing my son." What can happen is a kind of positive feedback loop. I do or have something good; someone else appreciates it; I appreciate it even more. 

== Blessed are the Poor ==

So, finally, let's look at the first blessing in the Sermon on the Mount and on the Sermon on the Plain. In Matthew, Jesus looks at the assembled crowd and says, "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs in the kingdom of heaven." In Luke, Jesus looks at his followers, and says, "Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God." And, in Luke, he makes a contrasting statement, too (v. 24), "But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation."

Let's clear up a few potential misunderstandings, first. Some theologians and commentators think there is a distinction between "the kingdom of heaven" (as Matthew has it) and "the kingdom of God" (as in Luke). Probably, though, there is no difference--Matthew is just engaged in the traditional Jewish practice of _not_ saying the name of God out of respect for God and God's name. You'll see that Matthew almost always uses "kingdom of heaven," and that Luke always uses "kingdom of God," often in parallel passages, like this one. This suggest they mean the same thing. 

Secondly, Luke has a blessing for "the poor," while Matthew has a blessing for "the poor in spirit." Let's not get too hung up on this, either. We are all aware, or should be, that God holds dear those who lack for money and worldly goods. This is a consistent theme thoughout all of scripture. Those who have the world's wealth are called to share with those who do not. And so, those of us (and that includes all of us here) who have more of the world's wealth than these first poor followers of Jesus need to be aware our riches can be a snare that prevents us from experiencing the full blessing of God. Remember the warning in Luke: "Woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation." Unless we want the totality of our blessing to be just the stuff we buy, we need to pay attention. And so, in Matthew, we are delighted to find that a blessing is found for those who are "poor in spirit." What it means to be "poor in spirit" is worth meditating on, and worth not being too dogmatic about. But it means at least this: we who have some riches are meant to keep the poor "in mind," to be mindful of those without our wealth, to be in solidarity with those who are poor, lest we experience the "woe" of a stunted life. 

I started by discussing how saying a "Blessed are..." statement is a way to express the delight of the person speaking about the person or thing being spoken about. So, here is Jesus saying, "Blessed are the poor," and what does Jesus find delightful? Is it not that Jesus was delighted to see God's reign beginning to spread? Here are the crowds--poor crowds, for the most part--who come to him, looking for his teaching, hanging on his every word. Luke has Jesus address the crowd directly, "Bless are you who are poor." Jesus can see the citizenship of the reign of God right in front of him, and Jesus can see the inklings of a new thing that God was doing in their lives. The rest of the sermon (which encapsulates the rest of his earthly teaching) will be about how things are done in the kingdom of God. No wonder he is delighted! God is at work, Jesus is about his Father's business, and he is excited to see it come to bear fruit.

It is not surprising to me that it was the poor who first came to Jesus, and whom Jesus blesses. They were the ones who most felt their need to be saved; their lives were "nasty, brutal and short," subject to the whims of a foreign government, subject to a priesthood who (even at their best) found them to be spiritually polluted. And so it is, I believe, for us. When we feel our own poverty and need, we make an opening for the kingdom to arrive. Look at how small our fellowship is, how poor our organization, how simple our structure! How blessed we feel when we see God at work among us! We can tell it's not our great ability, but God at work dispite our poverty. Likewise in our lives as individuals, how often God meets us when we feel broken, disabled and incapable of good! Sometimes being unsatisfied is the only way to be satisfied. And how often we have seen God at work when we connect ourselves with those who lack the world's resources. We think in these days of those in Haiti who have lost what little that have, and what a blessing it is when we hear even the smallest bits of good news of how God is using people to rebuild and restore people there. 

And so, today, I ask you to consider three things as we close:

1. What spiritual poverty are you feeling today through which you can expect God to provide a blessing?
2. What ways do you see God at work in our "poor, little flock"? How will you express your delight to God for this?
3. What new ways might God be calling you to connect with those who are materially poor?
